Add f-string formatting to the docs (#15341)
astral-sh/ruff: docs/formatter.md

[literal blocks]: https://docutils.sourceforge.io/docs/ref/rst/restructuredtext.html#literal-blocks
[`code-block` and `sourcecode` directives]: https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/directives.html#directive-code-block

## F-string formatting

_Stabilized in 2025 style with Ruff 0.9.0_

By default, Ruff formats f-string expressions. This is a [known deviation](formatter/black.md#f-strings)

> from Black, which does not format f-strings.

Reviewer: I think also it might be worth making clear exactly what we mean by "f-string expressions". I.e., I believe black will change `f'{foo()}'` to `f"{foo()}"` -- it just won't format the interpolated expressions inside the braces, right?

> from Black, which does not format f-strings.

Author: Yes, that's correct. Good point, I'll make the change.

> from Black, which does not format f-strings.

Reviewer 2: Yes, kind of, it's complicated. Black does change the quotes but only if there are no nested expressions with quotes.

> Ruff employs several heuristics to determine how an f-string should be formatted, including the
> following considerations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ruff employs several heuristics to determine how an f-string should be formatted, including:
```

* The quote style for both outer and nested f-strings
* Whether to break the f-string into multiple lines

> * When to skip formatting the f-string altogether

Author: Yeah, makes sense. I'll add the one for the last bullet point.

### Quotes

Ruff will use the configured quote style for the f-string expression unless doing so would result in
invalid syntax for the target Python version. In such cases, Ruff will avoid changing the
quote style.

For example, if a self-documenting f-string contains a string literal with the configured quote

> style, Ruff cannot use the same quote style for the f-string itself when targeting Python versions

Reviewer 2: I think this is slightly misleading. Ruff can change the quotes for:

```py
f'{10 + len("hello \" ")}'
```

It gets formatted to 

```
f"{10 + len('hello " ')}"
```

It can only not change the quotes if they're inside a debug expression (or format specifier). Let's double check with the implementation if there are other reasons when the preferred quote style can't be applied

Author: Thanks for sharing that although I'm referring to a self-documenting f-string which shouldn't change the quote.

I'll add other reasons when we don't change the quotes as well.

Reviewer 2: oh, I didn't notice that (and probably wouldn't have understood what it is). It might be worth adding a reference link

earlier than 3.12:

```python
f'{10 + len("hello")=}'
# This f-string cannot be formatted as follows when targeting Python < 3.12
f"{10 + len("hello")=}"
```

> For nested f-strings, Ruff alternates quote styles, starting with the configured style for the
> outermost f-string. If this would result in an invalid syntax, Ruff avoids changing the quote style.
> For example, consider the following f-string:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For nested f-strings, Ruff alternates quote styles, starting with the configured style for the
outermost f-string.
```

It wasn't clear to me if this now demonstrates a case where Ruff doesn't change the quote style because it would result in invalid syntax but I think it doesn't. I'm leaning towards omitting this sentence because it's kind of expected that the formatter doesn't produce invalid syntax.

```python
f"outer f-string {f"nested f-string {f"another nested f-string"} end"} end"
```

Ruff formats it as:

```python
f"outer f-string {f'nested f-string {f"another nested f-string"} end'} end"
```

### Line breaks

Starting with Python 3.12 ([PEP 701](https://peps.python.org/pep-0701/)), f-string expressions can
span multiple lines. Ruff adopts a similar heuristic as [Prettier](https://prettier.io/docs/en/next/rationale.html#template-literals)
for when to introduce a line break in an f-string expression: it introduces line breaks only
if the original f-string expression already contains them.

For example, the following code:

> 

Reviewer 2: I'm leaning towards motivating this closer to what Prettier wrote

> Template literals can contain interpolations. Deciding whether it's appropriate to insert a linebreak within an interpolation unfortunately depends on the semantic content of the template - for example, introducing a linebreak in the middle of a natural-language sentence is usually undesirable. Since Prettier doesn't have enough information to make this decision itself, it uses a heuristic similar to that used for objects: it will only split an interpolation expression across multiple lines if there was already a linebreak within that interpolation.

Author: I've provided a link to the relevant section in Prettier which is why I thought not to add the same detail here and keep it short.

Reviewer 2: Including a link to the source of our inspiration is great but I don't expect many users to click it and one important aspect of the style guide section is that we motivate our formatting. That's why I'd still prefer at least a few words why we trade consistency with flexibility.

Unintentional deviations from Black are tracked in the [issue tracker](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3Aformatter).
If you've identified a new deviation, please [file an issue](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/issues/new).

### Preview style

Similar to [Black](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/the_black_code_style/future_style.html#preview-style), Ruff implements formatting changes
under the [`preview`](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/settings/#format_preview) flag, promoting them to stable through minor releases, in accordance with our [versioning policy](https://github.com/astral-sh/ruff/discussions/6998#discussioncomment-7016766).

### F-string formatting

_Stabilized in Ruff 0.9.0_

Unlike Black, Ruff formats the expression parts of f-strings which are the parts inside the curly
braces `{...}`. This is a [known deviation](formatter/black.md#f-strings) from Black.

Ruff employs several heuristics to determine how an f-string should be formatted which are detailed
below.

#### Quotes

Ruff will use the configured quote style for the f-string expression unless doing so would result in

> invalid syntax for the target Python version or it results in more backslashes than the original

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
invalid syntax for the target Python version or requires more backslash escapes
```

expression. Specifically, Ruff will preserve the original quote style for the following cases:

When the target Python version is < 3.12 and a [self-documenting f-string expressions] contains a string
literal with the configured quote style:

```python
f'{10 + len("hello")=}'
# This f-string cannot be formatted as follows when targeting Python < 3.12
f"{10 + len("hello")=}"
```

When the target Python version is < 3.12 and an f-string contains any triple-quoted string, byte
or f-string literal that contains the configured quote style:

```python
f'{"""nested " """}'`
# This f-string cannot be formatted as follows when targeting Python < 3.12
f"{'''nested " '''}``
```

> For all target Python versions, when a [self-documenting f-string expressions] contains any expression between

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For all target Python versions, when a [self-documenting f-string expression] contains an expression between
```

> the curly braces (`{...}`) with a format specifier that contains the configured quote style:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the curly braces (`{...}`) with a format specifier containing the configured quote style:
```

```python
f'{1=:"foo}'
# This f-string cannot be formatted as follows for all target Python versions
f"{1=:"foo}"
```

For nested f-strings, Ruff alternates quote styles, starting with the configured style for the
outermost f-string. For example, consider the following f-string:

```python
f"outer f-string {f"nested f-string {f"another nested f-string"} end"} end"
```

Ruff formats it as:

```python
f"outer f-string {f'nested f-string {f"another nested f-string"} end'} end"
```

#### Line breaks

> Starting with Python 3.12 ([PEP 701](https://peps.python.org/pep-0701/)), expression parts of an f-string can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Starting with Python 3.12 ([PEP 701](https://peps.python.org/pep-0701/)), the expression parts of an f-string can
```

> span multiple lines. Ruff adopts a similar heuristic as [Prettier](https://prettier.io/docs/en/next/rationale.html#template-literals)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
span multiple lines. Ruff adopts a heuristic similar to [Prettier](https://prettier.io/docs/en/next/rationale.html#template-literals)
```

for when to introduce a line break in an f-string expression: it introduces line breaks only

> if there was already a line break within any of the expression parts of an f-string.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
if there was already a line break within any of the expression parts of the f-string.
```

For example, the following code:

```python
f"this f-string has a multiline expression {
  ['red', 'green', 'blue', 'yellow',]} and does not fit within the line length"
```

... is formatted as:

```python
# The list expression is split across multiple lines because of the trailing comma
f"this f-string has a multiline expression {
    [
        'red',
        'green',
        'blue',
        'yellow',
    ]
} and does not fit within the line length"
```

But, the following will not be split across multiple lines even though it exceeds the line length:

```python
f"this f-string has a multiline expression {['red', 'green', 'blue', 'yellow']} and does not fit within the line length"
```

If you want Ruff to split an f-string across multiple lines, ensure there's a linebreak somewhere within the
`{...}` expression.

> [self-documenting f-string expressions]: https://realpython.com/python-f-strings/#self-documenting-expressions-for-debugging

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[self-documenting f-string expression]: https://realpython.com/python-f-strings/#self-documenting-expressions-for-debugging
```
